Add the "sending a simple message to a service" tutorial (#3)
ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials: sending-a-simple-message-to-a-service/README.md

> # Sending a Simple Message to a Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Sending a simple message to a service
```
All titles should be in sentence case.

> ## What you'll build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What you will build
```
It is a best practice to avoid shortened forms. Also, the tone should be reconsidered as this is not a blog and is formal technical documentation. `What you will build` sounds too informal. Shall we say `Overview`?

Author: IMO, this is not a formal thing like a spec, but more a tutorial that users would follow along.

Author: Changed to Overview anyway.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
Do we need to add a `Prerequisites` section?

Author: "Set up the workspace" will cover that IMO. Why do we need to remove the empty line here?

Reviewer: Need not remove any extra lines. +1 to cover the prerequisites in the `Set up the workspace` section.

> Let's develop a service that allows a user to retrieve a list of doctors based on the doctor's specialization (category). The information about the doctors is retrieved from a separate microservice. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you develop a service to retrieve a list of doctors based on the doctor's specialization (category). The information about the doctors is retrieved from a separate microservice. 
```
Again, it is about the tone used in technical docs. Also, it is a best practice to express the meaning in the minimum number of words possible avoiding redundant words.

Author: The suggestion and the original version don't mean the same thing IMO. We have to talk about the end-user experience.

Author: This is now

> In this tutorial, we will develop a service that allows a user to retrieve a list of doctors based on the doctor's specialization (category). The information about the doctors is retrieved from a separate microservice.

Reviewer: We do not use the word `we` in technical docs. Should be active voice in `you` always.

Author: Changed to "you will develop".

> To implement this use case, you will develop a REST service with a single resource using Visual Studio Code with the Ballerina Swan Lake extension, and then run the service. The resouce  will receive the user request, retrieve details from the backend service, and respond to the user request with the relevant doctor details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To implement this use case, you will develop a REST service with a single resource using Visual Studio Code with the Ballerina Swan Lake extension, and then run the service. The resource will receive the user request, retrieve details from the backend service, and respond to the user request with the relevant doctor details.
```

> To implement this use case, you will develop a REST service with a single resource using Visual Studio Code with the Ballerina Swan Lake extension, and then run the service. The resource will receive the user request, retrieve details from the backend service, and respond to the user request with the relevant doctor details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement this use case, you will develop a REST service with a single resource using Visual Studio Code with the Ballerina Swan Lake extension, and then, run the service. The resource will receive the user request, retrieve details from the backend service, and respond to the user request with the relevant doctor details.
```

### Concepts covered

- REST API
- HTTP client

> ## Let's get started!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Let's get started!
```
Should avoid these in technical docs.

### Step 1: Set up the workspace

> Install [Ballerina Swan Lake](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) and the [Ballerina Swan Lake VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=wso2.ballerina) on VSCode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install [Ballerina Swan Lake](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) and the [Ballerina Swan Lake VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=wso2.ballerina) on VSCode.
```
Should these come under a `Prerequisites` section?

### Step 2: Develop the service

Follow the instructions given in this section to develop the service.

> 1. Create a new Ballerina project using the `bal` command and open it in VSCode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new Ballerina project using the `bal` command and open it in VS Code.
```

```bash
$ bal new sending-a-simple-message-to-a-service
```

2. Introduce the source code in files with the `.bal` extension (e.g., the `main.bal` file). 

Import the 
- `ballerina/http` module to develop the REST API and define the client that can be used to send requests to the backend service
- `ballerina/log` module to log some information for each client request

```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/log;
```

> 3. Define two [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port the listener should listen on and the URL of the backend service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Define two [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URL of the backend service.
```

```ballerina
configurable int port = 8290;
configurable string healthcareBackend = "http://localhost:9090/healthcare";
```

4. Define an [`http:Client` client](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#http-client) to send requests to the backend service.

```ballerina
final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check initializeHttpClient();

function initializeHttpClient() returns http:Client|error => new (healthcareBackend);
```

> The argument to the `new` expression is the URL for the backend service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The argument to the `new` expression is the URL for the backend service.
```
Shall we have this as in `info` section?

Author: No, this follows a pattern of describing aspects of the code after the snippet, under each point. For other tutorials there will be more details like this.

5. Define a record corresponding to the payload from the backend service.

```ballerina
type Doctor record {|
    string name;
    string hospital;
    string category;
    string availability;
    decimal fee;
|};
```

> The payload will be an array of JSON objects, where the structure of each JSON object matches this record. Note that you can use the "Paste JSON as record" VSCode command to generate the record if you have the JSON payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The payload will be an array of JSON objects in which, the structure of each JSON object matches this record. Note that you can use the "Paste JSON as record" VSCode command to generate the record if you have the JSON payload.
```
Should this be an info section? The note has to be added separately as a `note` section.

> 6. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, retrieves relevant details from the backend service, and responds to the request. Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`. Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on resource path `/querydoctor` and accepts the `category` (corresponding to the specialization) as a path parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, retrieves relevant details from the backend service, and responds to the request. Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on the `port`. Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the `/querydoctor` resource path and accepts the `category` (corresponding to the specialization) as a path parameter.
```

Author: We've had this discussion about using "the" with variable names multiple times. :) It is not correct. If the name of the variable was something like `listenOn`, it will read like

"Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on the `listenOn`."

```ballerina
service /healthcare on new http:Listener(port) {
    resource function get querydoctor/[string category]() {
        
    }
}
```

7. Implement the logic to retrieve and respond with relevant details.

```ballerina
service /healthcare on new http:Listener(port) {
    resource function get querydoctor/[string category]() 
            returns Doctor[]|http:NotFound|http:InternalServerError {
        log:printInfo("Retrieving information", specialization = category);
        
        Doctor[]|http:ClientError resp = queryDoctorEP->/[category];
        if resp is Doctor[] {
            return resp;
        }

        if resp is http:ClientRequestError {
            return <http:NotFound> {body: string `category not found: ${category}`};
        }

        return <http:InternalServerError> {body: resp.message()};
    }
}
```

> - The `log:printInfo` statement [logs](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#log) information about the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `log:printInfo` statement [logs](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#log) information about the request.
```
The flow seems to be broken here. We might need to add a sentence before these bullet points to describe what they are about.

Author: These are bullet points under 7.

Reviewer: Then, let's make sure these points are indented properly under step 7.

Author: Looks OK to me - https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/159d69794d448e76093f38f635855c68f066ebec/sending-a-simple-message-to-a-service/README.md#step-2-develop-the-service. Checked rendering on the website also.

```ballerina
log:printInfo("Retrieving information", specialization = category);
```

> - The call to the backend is done using a remote method call expression (using `->`) which distinguishes network calls from normal method calls. [Client data binding](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/http-client-data-binding/) is used to directly try and bind the JSON response on success to the expected array of records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The call to the backend is done using a remote method call expression (using `->`), which distinguishes network calls from normal method calls. [Client data binding](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/http-client-data-binding/) is used to directly try and bind the JSON response on success to the expected array of records.
```

```ballerina
Doctor[]|http:ClientError resp = queryDoctorEP->/[category];
```

> - Use the `is` check to decide the response based on the response to the client call. If the client call was successful and the respond payload was an array of `Doctor`s (as expected) directly return the array from the resource. If the request failed, send a "NotFound" response if the client call failed with a 4xx status code or return an "InternalServerError" response for other failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the `is` check to decide the response based on the response to the client call. If the client call was successful and the respond payload was an array of `Doctor`s (as expected), then, directly return the array from the resource. If the request failed, send a "NotFound" response if the client call failed with a 4xx status code or return an "InternalServerError" response for other failures.
```
We can add these messages also within backticks to differentiate them from the normal text.

```ballerina
log:printInfo("Retrieving information", specialization = category);

Doctor[]|http:ClientError resp = queryDoctorEP->/[category];
if resp is Doctor[] {
    return resp;
}

log:printError("Retrieving doctor information failed", resp);
if resp is http:ClientRequestError {
    return <http:NotFound> {body: string `category not found: ${category}`};
}

return <http:InternalServerError> {body: resp.message()};
```

#### Complete source

> You have successfully developed the required service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have successfully developed the required service below.
```

Author: What does this mean? We have successfully developed the service by following the steps mentioned above. The complete source code (which was developed already) is what is available below.

Reviewer: Then, we need to change the sentence to that: 
`Below is the complete source code of the service, which you developed above.`

Author: Isn't it just a lot more words to say the same thing? The title + the line we have at the moment convey the same idea?

Reviewer: issue here is we are saying you developed a service and showing some code snippet. We need to connect the 2 properly.

Author: We can get rid of this sentence entirely. Since the title indicates what it is.

Author: Will move this sentence to the previous section.

Author: Updated.

        log:printInfo("Retrieving information", specialization = category);
        
        Doctor[]|http:ClientError resp = queryDoctorEP->/[category];
        if resp is Doctor[] {
            return resp;
        }
        
        log:printError("Retrieving doctor information failed", resp);
        if resp is http:ClientRequestError {
            return <http:NotFound> {body: string `category not found: ${category}`};
        }

        return <http:InternalServerError> {body: resp.message()};
    }
}
```

#### Diagram

The [sequence diagram view](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/implement-the-code/sequence-diagram-view/) for the implemented resource method is the following.

![sequence diagram](./resources/tutorial_sending_a_simple_message_to_a_service.png)

### Step 3: Build and run the service

You can run this service by navigating to the project root and using the `bal run` command.

```bash
sending-a-simple-message-to-a-service$ bal run
Compiling source
        integration_tutorials/sending_a_simple_message_to_a_service:0.1.0

Running executable
```

### Step 4: Try out the use case

Let's test the use case by sending a request to the service.

> #### Start the back end service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Start the backend service
```

> Download the JAR file for the backend service from [here](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/main/backends/hospital-service/) and execute the following command to start the service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download the JAR file for the [backend service](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/main/backends/hospital-service/), and execute the following command to start the service:
```
It is a best practice to not use the word `here` in technical docs.

Author: Yeah, my bad, missed updating this.

```bash
bal run hospitalservice.jar
```

#### Send a request

Let's send a request to the service using cURL as follows.

> 1. Install and set up [cURL](https://curl.se/) as your client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install and set up [cURL](https://curl.se/) as your client.
```
Do we need to mention this? If so, should we add it under a main `Prerequisites` section?

Author: It's not a prerequisite. Just one way to do it.

> 1. Install and set up [cURL](https://curl.haxx.se/) as your client.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Install and set up [cURL](https://curl.se/) as your client.
```

2. Execute the following command.

```bash
curl -v http://localhost:8290/healthcare/querydoctor/surgery
```

#### Verify the response

> You will see the response message from backend with a list of details of the available doctors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will see the response message from the backend with a list of details of the available doctors.
```

    },
    {
        "name": "seth mears",
        "hospital": "pine valley community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "3.00 p.m - 5.00 p.m",
        "fee": 8000.0
    }
]
```

Now, check the terminal in which you ran the Ballerina service. You should see a log similar to the following.

```bash
time = 2023-08-15T13:01:34.022+05:30 level = INFO module = integration_tutorials/sending_a_simple_message_to_a_service message = "Retrieving information" specialization = "surgery"
```

### Step 5: Write tests for the use case

Let's test the use case by writing a test case that sends a request to the service and validates the payload for a successful request. Testing is enabled by the [Ballerina test framework](https://ballerina.io/learn/test-ballerina-code/test-services-and-clients/).

1. Introduce the tests in a `.bal` file within a directory named `tests` in the package. Import the `ballerina/test` module to use the Ballerina test framework and the `ballerina/http` module to use an `http:Client` client object to send requests to the implemented service and mock the backend service.

```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/test;
```

> 2. Mock the backend service by mocking the `http:Client` and the `get` resource method. Then mock the `initializeHttpClient` function, using the `@test:Mock` annotation, to return the mock HTTP client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Mock the backend service by mocking the `http:Client` and the `get` resource method. Then, mock the `initializeHttpClient` function using the `@test:Mock` annotation to return the mock HTTP client.
```

```ballerina
public client class MockHttpClient {

>     isolated resource function get [string ...path](map<string|string[]>? headers = (), http:TargetType targetType = http:Response,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    isolated resource function get [string... path](map<string|string[]>? headers = (), http:TargetType targetType = http:Response,
```
Autocorrected to this in VScode. Shall we change this then?

    }
}

@test:Mock {
    functionName: "initializeHttpClient"
}
function initializeHttpClientMock() returns http:Client|error =>
    test:mock(http:Client, new MockHttpClient());
```

3. Use the `@test:Config` annotation to indicate that a function is a test function. Implement the test to send a request to the service and test for value equality between the retrieved payload and the expected payload using the `test:assertEquals` function.

```ballerina
@test:Config
function testSuccessfulRequest() returns error? {
    Doctor[] doctors = check cl->/surgery;
    test:assertEquals(doctors, getSurgeryResponsePayload());
}
```

4. Run the `bal test` command from the project root to run the tests.

```bash
sending-a-simple-message-to-a-service$ bal test
Compiling source
        integration_tutorials/sending_a_simple_message_to_a_service:0.1.0

Running Tests

        sending_a_simple_message_to_a_service
time = 2023-08-17T09:01:23.758+05:30 level = INFO module = integration_tutorials/sending_a_simple_message_to_a_service message = "Retrieving information" specialization = "surgery"

                1 passing
                0 failing
                0 skipped
```

> You have now developed and tested a simple Ballerina REST service which receives a request, logs a message, sends a request to a backend service, and responds to the original request with the response from the backend service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have now developed and tested a simple Ballerina REST service, which receives a request, logs a message, sends a request to a backend service, and responds to the original request with the response from the backend service.
```
